# Using Single-Cell RNA Sequencing Data to Study Plastid Differentiation Dynamics with Nucleus Gene Expression in *Arabidopsis thaliana*
Little is known on how cell differentiation dynamics are impacted by other biological systems, such as organelle development. The plant provides an interesting context to study this impact given its diverse array of cell and plastid types. Plastids are organelles that are unique to plant cells, synthesizing and storing critical chemical compounds and pigments. All plastids develop from undifferentiated proplastids in meristematic tissue; however, it is unknown how plastid development progresses relative to cell development, namely the extent to which plastid state is coupled with cell state. This coupling was explored via single-cell RNA sequencing of the root of *Arabidopsis thaliana*. Cells and plastids were clustered based on distinct nucleus-encoded plastid genes and non-plastid- related genes, respectively, enabling independent assignment of plastid and cell types. A machine learning model was developed to classify cell types based solely on plastid gene expression profiles. The high accuracy of this model (>96%) suggests that each cell type houses a distinctive plastid type. A trajectory inference model was used to create a pseudotime axis between undifferentiated meristematic cells and mature endodermal cells, enabling the study of plastid development relative to cell development. Along this pseudotime axis, plastid state was found to be coupled with cell state. Our findings lead to advances in plastid engineering and may enable future biotechnological applications. Moreover, we offer a novel computational pipeline to actually study cell organelles at the single-cell level which opens the door for a wide variety of applications beyond plants.
